# health-plan-comparison

Our project is a real-life initiative for a Medicare Advantage health insurer, Devoted Health, based in Waltham, MA.  Medicare Advantage health insurers, or health plans, are private health insurance companies that contract with the federal government (Medicare) to provide healthcare coverage to eligible individuals, senior citizens.  These plans typically offer additional benefits beyond what Original Medicare provides.  One type of plan offered by Devoted and other Medicare Advantage carriers is a Dual Eligible Special Needs Plan, or D-SNP (“D-Snip”) for short.  D-SNP plans are those that cover individuals eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid.  These “Dual Eligibles” are therefore senior citizens with limited financial resources; this population often has poorer health, including chronic conditions, and disproportionately utilizes the healthcare system.  Each year, analysts at Devoted Health conduct comparison studies to assess how Devoted’s D-SNP offerings compare to those of its competitors in each US market, typically at a city/state level.  The analysts look at particular key benefits covered and summarize the differences between Devoted’s offerings compared to its competitors.   Examples of key benefits of interest include Healthy Food Card Benefits, which offer an allowance for healthy foods, flex cards which cover items like pet food and other goods, and hearing aids.  Because Devoted and several other large carriers offer D-SNP plans in many US markets (estimated at 30+), and because there are several key benefits to assess, these comparison studies take numerous hours.  Analysts manually gather benefit data points for hundreds of health plan/market combinations, a painstaking task.  Adding to the complexity is that the work is currently highly manual, with analysts searching for benefits in PDF coverage documents that are almost always over 200 pages in length.

Our goal is to help Devoted conduct these annual D-SNP comparison studies in a more sophisticated manner.  This project will entail several components.  First, we plan to leverage data science and advanced analytical techniques to extract benefit information from coverage documents to automatically populate the benefit comparison grids which Devoted analysts manually populate.  Since we have the 2022 benefit grids, we can assess the performance of our algorithms by comparing our extracted results with the actual results from 2022.  Second, we plan to summarize Devoted’s benefit offerings and how they compare to its D-SNP competitors in each market.  These summaries are typically two or three sentences for each market indicating whether Devoted’s offerings are in line with competitor offerings.  This work informs benefit plan designs for future years.  Third, we plan to quantify the relative similarity between Devoted and its competitors in each market by deriving some sort of similarity metric.  Finally, we plan to cluster health plans together based on the structured benefit information consolidated, and potentially the summaries, in order to analyze which plans are most similar.  This project is expected to save significant analyst time, save expenses for Devoted, and also ensure the accuracy of these annual benefit comparison studies.  Further, this work ensures Devoted is appropriately managing its vital Dual Eligible population by assessing the benefits offered to them.
